# Aithal, S. G., Rao, A. B., & Singh, S. (2021). Automatic question-answer pairs generation and question similarity mechanism in question answering system. Applied Intelligence.

This paper generates question/answer pairs from a passage by first {generating questions using ProphetNet fine-tuned on SQuAD}, then {filtering those questions by computing similarity to known-good questions from SQuAD, a question-answering dataset}, then using {BERT to generate answers}.

[[Using machine learning to generate good spaced repetition prompts from explanatory text]]

The results are sometimes pretty decent, though of course they still need a great deal of human filtering.

## Example

 **Table 7** This table illustrates the generated question-answer pairs from the given passage
 **Passage 2:** The availability of the Bible in vernacular languages was important to the spread of the Protestant movement and the development of the Reformed church in France. The country had a long history of struggles with the papacy by the time the Protestant Reformation finally arrived. Around 1294, a French version of the Scriptures was prepared by the Roman Catholic priest, Guyard de Moulin. A two-volume illustrated folio paraphrase version based on his manuscript, by Jean de Rely, was printed in Paris in 1487. G1. what was important to the protestant movement in france ? G2. why did france struggle with the papacy before the protestant reformation ? G3. what did france have a long history of with the papacy ? G4. france had a long history of struggles with what group by the time what finally arrived ? G5. when did the protestant reformation arrive in france ? G6. what did guyard de moulin prepare around 1294 ? G7. what did guyard de moulin do with the french version of the Bible? G8. what religion was guyard de moulin ? G9. who prepared a french version of the scriptures around 1294 ? G10. what was printed in Paris in 1487 ? G11. on what manuscript was jean de rely ’s version of the Bible-based ? G12. what was jean de rely ’s version based on ? G13. who created the illustrated folio paraphrase version of the bible in 1487 ? G14. how was jean de rely ’s version of the bible published ? G15. where was jean de rely ’s version of the Bible printed ? A1. the availability of the Bible in vernacular languages A2. the country had a long history A3 . struggles A4 . the papacy A5 . around 1294 A6. a french version of the scriptures A7 . prepared A8 . roman catholic A9 . guyard de moulin A10 . a two-volume illustrated folio paraphrase version based on his manuscript A11 . guyard de moulin A12 . manuscript A13 . jean de rely A14 . two-volume illustrated folio paraphrase A15 . paris
