# Cloze deletions often create frustrations in non-technical mnemonic texts

Trouble with [[Cloze deletion]] prompts was a common theme from feedback to [[How to write good prompts]]. My sense is that people found themselves frequently forgetting the answers to these questions, but in a way which felt less _well-justified_ than for Q/A prompts. The problems here go beyond the problems with self-authored cloze prompts ([[Cloze deletion prompts seem to produce less understanding than question-answer pairs in spaced repetition memory systems]]): they’re specific to authoring prompts in the [[Mnemonic medium]].

Many people felt that what they were forgetting was _my wording_ —rather than some well-defined exogenous piece of knowledge ([[Mnemonic medium readers sometimes feel impeded by authors’ wording choices]]). That’s probably true in some sense. Cloze deletions may require readers to additionally remember _what the question is asking of them_ to a greater degree: see [[Spaced repetition memory prompts should unambiguously produce a specific answer]] for more discussion of this issue. This means cloze prompts usually fail the [[Expert response heuristic, after Issa Rice]].

[[Soren Bjornstad]]):

> Now some thoughts (and questions, if you have time) on cloze deletions. I > seem to be having particular trouble with the cloze deletions in the Orbit > items in the article so far (grain of salt: I have only done in-text and one > review session so far, and I don’t have actual objective statistics on my > performance on the cards). _Hypothesis:_ maybe other people’s prompts > transfer particularly poorly on cloze deletions when used with vaguer, more > conceptual knowledge like this article, since they rely more on the author’s > phrasing, and the exact words I use will differ more from the exact words > you use than our representations of concepts? Questions subjectively seem to > trigger less linguistic processing than cloze deletions, at least for me – > the process of answering a question is more like “mentally represent the > question, find the right link”, while the cloze deletion is more like “find > the right words to put in the sentence”. > … > This feels like an accurate assessment to me. And an update on the results > of a month or so of reviewing: I’ve picked up on many of them, but the ones > I’m continuing to have trouble with all fall in this category.

[[Issa Rice]]:

> I often like to pick out quotes or phrases I like while reading. It helps > that I am the one who is picking the phrases that resonate with me. I’ve > also tended towards passive review over time on these kinds of cards (re- > reading a quote I like brings me joy, but being forced to recall the exact > phrasing is often not fun, unless it’s a phrase I’d like to get better at > using in my own writing).
