# Hiroshi Ishii

Eminent [[Human-computer interaction]] researcher, at the MIT Media Lab, leading the “Tangible Media” group, which explores interactions merging the worlds of bits and atoms.

I think one main reason I’m drawn to his work is that unlike most contemporary work in HCI, there’s a bold and imaginative vision running through his lab’s work. In fact, on [[his group’s home page]], he writes:

> Looking back on the history of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI), we notice > that quantum leaps have rarely resulted from studies on users’ needs; they > have instead stemmed from the passion and dreams of visionaries like Dr. > Douglas Engelbart. By looking beyond current limitations, we believe that > vision-driven design is critical to foster these quantum leaps, while also > complementing needs-driven and technology-driven design. From Tangible Bits, > an early example of our vision-driven research, we shifted to Radical Atoms, > which seeks out new guiding principles and concepts to view the world of > bits and atoms in a new light, with the goal of trailblazing a new realm in > interaction design. > > From these three approaches in design research — technology-driven, needs- > driven, and vision-driven — we focus on the vision-driven approach due to > its lifespan. We know that technologies become obsolete in ~1 year, and > users’ needs change quickly and dramatically in ~10 years. However, we > believe that a clear vision can last beyond our lifespan. While it may be > decades before atom hackers (such as material scientists or self-organizing > nano-robot engineers) invent the necessary enabling technologies for Radical > Atoms, the exploration of interaction design should begin today.
