# Pyc, M. A., & Rawson, K. A. (2009). Testing the retrieval effort hypothesis: Does greater difficulty correctly recalling information lead to higher levels of memory? Journal of Memory and Language, 60(4), 437–447

Experimental study demonstrating [[Desirable difficulties, after Bjork]] in the context of [[Retrieval practice]].

> Although substantial research has demonstrated the benefits of retrieval > practice for pro- moting memory, very few studies have tested theoretical > accounts of this effect. Across two experiments, we tested a hypothesis that > follows from the desirable difficulty framework …, the retrieval effort > hypothesis, which states that dif- ficult but successful retrievals are > better for memory than easier successful retrievals. To test the hypothesis, > we set up conditions under which retrieval during practice was suc- cessful > but differentially difficult. Interstimulus interval (ISI) and criterion > level (number of times items were required to be correctly retrieved) were > manipulated to vary the dif- ficulty of retrieval. In support of the > retrieval effort hypothesis, results indicated that ==as the difficulty of > retrieval during practice increased, final test performance increased. > Longer versus shorter ISIs led to more difficulty retrieving items, but > higher levels of final test per- formance==. Additionally, as criterion > level increased, retrieval was less difficult, and dimin- ishing returns for > final test performance were observed.
